docs/MACOS_BUILD.md, before:

# GeneralsX - macOS Build Guide

## 🎉 STATUS: SUCCESSFULLY RUNNING ON macOS ARM64!

**Zero Hour (GeneralsX)** now **fully executes** on native Apple Silicon with clean initialization and shutdown!

This guide provides detailed instructions for building GeneralsX on macOS with native Apple Silicon (ARM64) support.

## 📋 Prerequisites

### Essential Tools
- **Xcode Command Line Tools** (latest version)
- **Homebrew** for package management
- **CMake** 3.20 or higher
- **Ninja** build system (recommended)
- **Apple Silicon (M1/M2/M3)** or Intel macOS support

### Prerequisites Installation

```bash
# Install Xcode Command Line Tools
xcode-select --install

# Install Homebrew (if not installed)
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"

# Install CMake and Ninja
brew install cmake ninja
```

## 🔧 Environment Setup

### 1. Repository Clone
```bash
git clone https://github.com/fbraz3/GeneralsX.git
cd GeneralsX
```

### 2. Build Configuration (ARM64 Native - Recommended)
```bash
# Configure using macos-arm64 preset for native ARM64 architecture
cmake --preset macos-arm64
```

### Alternative: Intel x64 macOS
```bash
# For Intel Macs using dedicated Intel preset
cmake --preset macos-x64
```

### Compatibility: Legacy VC6 preset
```bash
# For compatibility or Windows development
cmake --preset vc6
```

## 🏗️ Building

### 🎯 Primary Target: Zero Hour (GeneralsXZH)
```bash
# Build the main Zero Hour executable (ARM64 native recommended)
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4

# Executable will be created at: build/macos-arm64/GeneralsMD/GeneralsXZH
```

### 🎮 Secondary Target: Original Generals (GeneralsX)
```bash
# Build the original Generals executable
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsX -j 4

# For Intel Macs:
cmake --build build/macos-x64 --target GeneralsX -j 4

# Executables will be created at:
# ARM64: build/macos-arm64/Generals/generals
# Intel: build/macos-x64/Generals/generals
```

### 🔧 Core Libraries (Optional Testing)
```bash
# To test core libraries independently
# ARM64:
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target ww3d2 wwlib wwmath -j 4

# Intel x64:
cmake --build build/macos-x64 --target ww3d2 wwlib wwmath -j 4
```

### ⚡ Performance Build Optimization
```bash
# Use dynamic core allocation (recommended)
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j $(sysctl -n hw.ncpu | awk '{print int($1/2)}')
```

## 🚀 Compilation Cache (ccache) - HIGHLY RECOMMENDED

**Speed up rebuilds by 10-20x!** ccache dramatically reduces compilation time by caching compiled object files.

### Performance Comparison
- **First build (no cache)**: ~3-4 minutes (923 files)
- **Rebuild with changes**: ~30-60 seconds (only modified files)
- **Full rebuild from cache**: ~1 minute (cache hit on all files)

### Installation & Setup

```bash
# Install ccache via Homebrew
brew install ccache

# Configure cache size (10GB recommended)
ccache --set-config=max_size=10G

# Verify configuration
ccache -s
```

### Using ccache with CMake

ccache is **automatically enabled by default** in this project. The CMake configuration detects and uses ccache if available.

```bash
# Standard build - ccache automatically used if installed
cmake --preset macos-arm64
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4

# To disable ccache (if needed)
cmake --preset macos-arm64 -DUSE_CCACHE=OFF
```

### ccache Statistics & Management

```bash
# View cache statistics (hit rate, size, etc)
ccache -s

# Sample output:
# Local storage:
#   Cache size (GB): 3.2 / 10.0 (32.00%)
#   Hits: 18456 / 23120 (79.82%)
#   Misses: 4664

# Clear cache (if needed)
ccache -C

# Zero cache statistics (reset counters)
ccache -z
```

### Environment Variables (Optional)

```bash
# Add to ~/.zshrc or ~/.bashrc for persistent configuration
export CCACHE_DIR=$HOME/.ccache              # Cache directory (default)
export CCACHE_MAXSIZE=10G                    # Max cache size
export CCACHE_COMPRESS=1                     # Compress cached files (saves space)
export CCACHE_COMPRESSLEVEL=6                # Compression level (1-9, 6 is balanced)
export CCACHE_SLOPPINESS=pch_defines,time_macros  # Better cache hit rate

# Apply changes
source ~/.zshrc  # or source ~/.bashrc
```

### Troubleshooting ccache

```bash
# Check if ccache is being used
echo $CMAKE_C_COMPILER_LAUNCHER
echo $CMAKE_CXX_COMPILER_LAUNCHER
# Should output: /usr/local/bin/ccache

# Verbose output for debugging
CCACHE_DEBUG=1 cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4

# If ccache is not working, verify installation
which ccache
ccache --version
```

### Expected Performance Gains

| Scenario | Without ccache | With ccache | Speedup |
|----------|---------------|-------------|---------|
| **First build** | 3-4 min | 3-4 min | 1x (populating cache) |
| **Rebuild (10% changed)** | 2-3 min | 30-60 sec | **3-6x faster** |
| **Rebuild (1% changed)** | 1-2 min | 10-20 sec | **6-12x faster** |
| **Clean rebuild** | 3-4 min | 45-90 sec | **2-4x faster** |

**💡 Pro Tip**: First build populates the cache, subsequent builds are dramatically faster!

## 🎮 Runtime Setup

### Game Assets (Required)
The game requires original Command & Conquer: Generals/Zero Hour assets to run properly.

```bash
# Create directory for assets
mkdir -p $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD

# Copy the executable (Zero Hour recommended)
# ARM64:
cp ./build/macos-arm64/GeneralsMD/GeneralsXZH $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD/

# Intel x64:
cp ./build/macos-x64/GeneralsMD/GeneralsXZH $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD/

# Copy original game assets to $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD/
# Required: Data/, Maps/, etc. from original installation
# Zero Hour assets recommended for best compatibility
```

### Running the Game (ARM64 Native Performance) ✅ WORKING!

**Status**: Zero Hour now executes successfully on macOS ARM64 with **Metal backend by default**!

```bash
# Run Zero Hour (ARM64 native + Metal backend) ✅ VERIFIED WORKING
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && ./GeneralsXZH

# Graphics Backend:
# - macOS: Metal backend (default, native performance)
# - Override to OpenGL: USE_OPENGL=1 ./GeneralsXZH
# - Linux: OpenGL backend (default)

# Expected output:
# - Metal backend auto-detection on macOS
# - Complete initialization (WinMain → GameEngine → Subsystems)
# - 19 .BIG archive files loaded
# - Metal rendering: Blue-gray screen with colored triangle
# - Responds to ESC key for exit
# - Main game loop execution
# - Clean exit with code 0

# With timeout for testing (30 seconds)
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && timeout 30s ./GeneralsXZH

# Force OpenGL backend (for testing/comparison)
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && USE_OPENGL=1 ./GeneralsXZH

# With LLDB for debugging
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && lldb -o run -o quit ./GeneralsXZH

# Alternative: Original Generals (⚠️ Not yet working - 6 errors remaining)
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && ./generals
```

**Execution Verification**:
```
✅ WinMain initialization successful
✅ GameEngine::init() completed  
✅ File system: 19 .BIG files loaded
✅ Font rendering: Store_GDI_Char macOS fallback
✅ Audio: OpenAL stub initialized
✅ Main loop: GameEngine::execute() entered
✅ Clean shutdown: exit code 0
```

## 🐛 Debug and Development

### Debugging with LLDB (ARM64 Native)
```bash
# Use automatic debug script for crash investigation
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && lldb -s $REPO_PATH/scripts/debug_script.lldb GeneralsXZH

# Direct execution with debug output
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && ./GeneralsXZH
```

### Alternative Build Configurations

#### ARM64 Native Debug Build (Recommended)
```bash
# For development with debug symbols (ARM64)
cmake --preset macos-arm64 -DRTS_BUILD_OPTION_DEBUG=ON
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

#### Intel x64 Debug Build
```bash
# For development with debug symbols (Intel)
cmake --preset macos-x64 -DRTS_BUILD_OPTION_DEBUG=ON
cmake --build build/macos-x64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

#### ARM64 Native Release Build (Default)
```bash
# For optimized performance (ARM64)
cmake --preset macos-arm64 -DRTS_BUILD_OPTION_DEBUG=OFF
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

#### Intel x64 Release Build
```bash
# For optimized performance (Intel)
cmake --preset macos-x64 -DRTS_BUILD_OPTION_DEBUG=OFF
cmake --build build/macos-x64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

## ⚡ Performance Tips

### ARM64 Native Compilation Benefits
- **Superior Performance**: Native Apple Silicon execution
- **Better Memory Management**: Improved stability and efficiency
- **Enhanced Debugging**: Better crash investigation capabilities
- **Future-Proof**: Optimized for current and future Apple hardware

### Parallel Compilation
```bash
# Use half of available cores to avoid system overload
# For 8-core M1: -j 4, For 10-core M1 Pro: -j 5, For M1 Max: -j 8
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j $(sysctl -n hw.ncpu | awk '{print int($1/2)}')
```

### Build Cleanup
```bash
# Clean previous build if architecture changed
# ARM64:
rm -rf build/macos-arm64
cmake --preset macos-arm64

# Intel x64:
rm -rf build/macos-x64
cmake --preset macos-x64
```

## 📊 macOS Port Status

### ✅ Fully Functional (Phase 22.7)
- **ARM64 Native Compilation**: 100% successful on Apple Silicon
- **Complete Compilation**: All modules compile successfully  
- **Linking**: All libraries link correctly
- **Vector Corruption Protection**: 17+ trillion element detection working perfectly
- **Cross-Platform APIs**: Win32→POSIX compatibility layer stable
- **Advanced INI Processing**: Thousands of successful operations

### � Current Investigation (Phase 22.7)
- **End Token Parsing**: Investigating persistent INI parser exceptions during End token processing
- **Exception Analysis**: "Unknown exception in field parser for: 'End'" and "'  End'" resolution
- **Bypass Optimization**: Enhancing End token bypass mechanisms for complete stability

### 🎯 Recent Achievements
- **Major Breakthrough**: Vector corruption crash completely resolved
- **ARM64 Success**: Native Apple Silicon compilation working
- **Protection System**: Robust validation prevents all corruption scenarios
- **Significant Progress**: Program advances far beyond previous crash points

### 📈 Next Steps
- End token exception resolution
- Complete game engine initialization 
- Full gameplay validation testing

## 📚 Additional Resources

- **Progress Tracking**: [MACOS_PORT.md](MACOS_PORT.md)
- **Next Steps**: [NEXT_STEPS.md](NEXT_STEPS.md)

## 🆘 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### CMake can't find dependencies
```bash
# Update Homebrew and reinstall CMake
brew update && brew upgrade cmake
```

#### Architecture mismatch errors
```bash
# Clean and rebuild with explicit architecture
# ARM64:
rm -rf build/macos-arm64
cmake --preset macos-arm64
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4

# Intel x64:
rm -rf build/macos-x64
cmake --preset macos-x64
cmake --build build/macos-x64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

#### Linking errors
```bash
# Clean and rebuild
rm -rf build/macos-arm64
cmake --preset macos-arm64
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

#### Runtime crash or "Unknown exception in field parser"
```bash
# Check if assets are in correct location
ls $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD/Data/
ls $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD/Maps/

# Run with debug output
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && ./GeneralsXZH

# Use LLDB for crash investigation
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && lldb -s $REPO_PATH/scripts/debug_script.lldb GeneralsXZH
```

### Performance Issues
```bash
# Verify architecture execution
# ARM64:
file build/macos-arm64/GeneralsMD/GeneralsXZH
# Should show: Mach-O 64-bit executable arm64

# Intel x64:
file build/macos-x64/GeneralsMD/GeneralsXZH
# Should show: Mach-O 64-bit executable x86_64

# Check system resources
top -pid $(pgrep GeneralsXZH)
```

### Support
For macOS port specific issues, check [Issues](https://github.com/fbraz3/GeneralsX/issues) or open a new one.

---
**Last updated**: Dezembro 30, 2024  
**Status**: Phase 22.7 - INI Parser End Token Exception Investigation  
**Architecture**: ARM64 Native (Apple Silicon) + Intel Compatibility

Commit message:

docs: rename MACOS_PORT.md to MACOS_PORT_DIARY.md to reflect technical journal purpose
- Renamed docs/MACOS_PORT.md → docs/MACOS_PORT_DIARY.md
- Updated 28 references across repository (docs, instructions, readmes)
- Clarified purpose: detailed technical development diary/logbook
- File contains session-by-session implementation notes (3,937 lines)
- All links and cross-references updated for new filename

Reason: Name better reflects content as detailed technical journal
documenting day-by-day porting progress with implementation notes,
discoveries, blockers, and solutions.

Refs: Phase 33.8 audio implementation complete, INI parser investigation next

docs/MACOS_BUILD.md, after:

# GeneralsX - macOS Build Guide

## 🎉 STATUS: SUCCESSFULLY RUNNING ON macOS ARM64!

**Zero Hour (GeneralsX)** now **fully executes** on native Apple Silicon with clean initialization and shutdown!

This guide provides detailed instructions for building GeneralsX on macOS with native Apple Silicon (ARM64) support.

## 📋 Prerequisites

### Essential Tools
- **Xcode Command Line Tools** (latest version)
- **Homebrew** for package management
- **CMake** 3.20 or higher
- **Ninja** build system (recommended)
- **Apple Silicon (M1/M2/M3)** or Intel macOS support

### Prerequisites Installation

```bash
# Install Xcode Command Line Tools
xcode-select --install

# Install Homebrew (if not installed)
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"

# Install CMake and Ninja
brew install cmake ninja
```

## 🔧 Environment Setup

### 1. Repository Clone
```bash
git clone https://github.com/fbraz3/GeneralsX.git
cd GeneralsX
```

### 2. Build Configuration (ARM64 Native - Recommended)
```bash
# Configure using macos-arm64 preset for native ARM64 architecture
cmake --preset macos-arm64
```

### Alternative: Intel x64 macOS
```bash
# For Intel Macs using dedicated Intel preset
cmake --preset macos-x64
```

### Compatibility: Legacy VC6 preset
```bash
# For compatibility or Windows development
cmake --preset vc6
```

## 🏗️ Building

### 🎯 Primary Target: Zero Hour (GeneralsXZH)
```bash
# Build the main Zero Hour executable (ARM64 native recommended)
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4

# Executable will be created at: build/macos-arm64/GeneralsMD/GeneralsXZH
```

### 🎮 Secondary Target: Original Generals (GeneralsX)
```bash
# Build the original Generals executable
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsX -j 4

# For Intel Macs:
cmake --build build/macos-x64 --target GeneralsX -j 4

# Executables will be created at:
# ARM64: build/macos-arm64/Generals/generals
# Intel: build/macos-x64/Generals/generals
```

### 🔧 Core Libraries (Optional Testing)
```bash
# To test core libraries independently
# ARM64:
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target ww3d2 wwlib wwmath -j 4

# Intel x64:
cmake --build build/macos-x64 --target ww3d2 wwlib wwmath -j 4
```

### ⚡ Performance Build Optimization
```bash
# Use dynamic core allocation (recommended)
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j $(sysctl -n hw.ncpu | awk '{print int($1/2)}')
```

## 🚀 Compilation Cache (ccache) - HIGHLY RECOMMENDED

**Speed up rebuilds by 10-20x!** ccache dramatically reduces compilation time by caching compiled object files.

### Performance Comparison
- **First build (no cache)**: ~3-4 minutes (923 files)
- **Rebuild with changes**: ~30-60 seconds (only modified files)
- **Full rebuild from cache**: ~1 minute (cache hit on all files)

### Installation & Setup

```bash
# Install ccache via Homebrew
brew install ccache

# Configure cache size (10GB recommended)
ccache --set-config=max_size=10G

# Verify configuration
ccache -s
```

### Using ccache with CMake

ccache is **automatically enabled by default** in this project. The CMake configuration detects and uses ccache if available.

```bash
# Standard build - ccache automatically used if installed
cmake --preset macos-arm64
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4

# To disable ccache (if needed)
cmake --preset macos-arm64 -DUSE_CCACHE=OFF
```

### ccache Statistics & Management

```bash
# View cache statistics (hit rate, size, etc)
ccache -s

# Sample output:
# Local storage:
#   Cache size (GB): 3.2 / 10.0 (32.00%)
#   Hits: 18456 / 23120 (79.82%)
#   Misses: 4664

# Clear cache (if needed)
ccache -C

# Zero cache statistics (reset counters)
ccache -z
```

### Environment Variables (Optional)

```bash
# Add to ~/.zshrc or ~/.bashrc for persistent configuration
export CCACHE_DIR=$HOME/.ccache              # Cache directory (default)
export CCACHE_MAXSIZE=10G                    # Max cache size
export CCACHE_COMPRESS=1                     # Compress cached files (saves space)
export CCACHE_COMPRESSLEVEL=6                # Compression level (1-9, 6 is balanced)
export CCACHE_SLOPPINESS=pch_defines,time_macros  # Better cache hit rate

# Apply changes
source ~/.zshrc  # or source ~/.bashrc
```

### Troubleshooting ccache

```bash
# Check if ccache is being used
echo $CMAKE_C_COMPILER_LAUNCHER
echo $CMAKE_CXX_COMPILER_LAUNCHER
# Should output: /usr/local/bin/ccache

# Verbose output for debugging
CCACHE_DEBUG=1 cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4

# If ccache is not working, verify installation
which ccache
ccache --version
```

### Expected Performance Gains

| Scenario | Without ccache | With ccache | Speedup |
|----------|---------------|-------------|---------|
| **First build** | 3-4 min | 3-4 min | 1x (populating cache) |
| **Rebuild (10% changed)** | 2-3 min | 30-60 sec | **3-6x faster** |
| **Rebuild (1% changed)** | 1-2 min | 10-20 sec | **6-12x faster** |
| **Clean rebuild** | 3-4 min | 45-90 sec | **2-4x faster** |

**💡 Pro Tip**: First build populates the cache, subsequent builds are dramatically faster!

## 🎮 Runtime Setup

### Game Assets (Required)
The game requires original Command & Conquer: Generals/Zero Hour assets to run properly.

```bash
# Create directory for assets
mkdir -p $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD

# Copy the executable (Zero Hour recommended)
# ARM64:
cp ./build/macos-arm64/GeneralsMD/GeneralsXZH $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD/

# Intel x64:
cp ./build/macos-x64/GeneralsMD/GeneralsXZH $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD/

# Copy original game assets to $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD/
# Required: Data/, Maps/, etc. from original installation
# Zero Hour assets recommended for best compatibility
```

### Running the Game (ARM64 Native Performance) ✅ WORKING!

**Status**: Zero Hour now executes successfully on macOS ARM64 with **Metal backend by default**!

```bash
# Run Zero Hour (ARM64 native + Metal backend) ✅ VERIFIED WORKING
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && ./GeneralsXZH

# Graphics Backend:
# - macOS: Metal backend (default, native performance)
# - Override to OpenGL: USE_OPENGL=1 ./GeneralsXZH
# - Linux: OpenGL backend (default)

# Expected output:
# - Metal backend auto-detection on macOS
# - Complete initialization (WinMain → GameEngine → Subsystems)
# - 19 .BIG archive files loaded
# - Metal rendering: Blue-gray screen with colored triangle
# - Responds to ESC key for exit
# - Main game loop execution
# - Clean exit with code 0

# With timeout for testing (30 seconds)
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && timeout 30s ./GeneralsXZH

# Force OpenGL backend (for testing/comparison)
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && USE_OPENGL=1 ./GeneralsXZH

# With LLDB for debugging
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && lldb -o run -o quit ./GeneralsXZH

# Alternative: Original Generals (⚠️ Not yet working - 6 errors remaining)
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && ./generals
```

**Execution Verification**:
```
✅ WinMain initialization successful
✅ GameEngine::init() completed  
✅ File system: 19 .BIG files loaded
✅ Font rendering: Store_GDI_Char macOS fallback
✅ Audio: OpenAL stub initialized
✅ Main loop: GameEngine::execute() entered
✅ Clean shutdown: exit code 0
```

## 🐛 Debug and Development

### Debugging with LLDB (ARM64 Native)
```bash
# Use automatic debug script for crash investigation
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && lldb -s $REPO_PATH/scripts/debug_script.lldb GeneralsXZH

# Direct execution with debug output
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && ./GeneralsXZH
```

### Alternative Build Configurations

#### ARM64 Native Debug Build (Recommended)
```bash
# For development with debug symbols (ARM64)
cmake --preset macos-arm64 -DRTS_BUILD_OPTION_DEBUG=ON
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

#### Intel x64 Debug Build
```bash
# For development with debug symbols (Intel)
cmake --preset macos-x64 -DRTS_BUILD_OPTION_DEBUG=ON
cmake --build build/macos-x64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

#### ARM64 Native Release Build (Default)
```bash
# For optimized performance (ARM64)
cmake --preset macos-arm64 -DRTS_BUILD_OPTION_DEBUG=OFF
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

#### Intel x64 Release Build
```bash
# For optimized performance (Intel)
cmake --preset macos-x64 -DRTS_BUILD_OPTION_DEBUG=OFF
cmake --build build/macos-x64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

## ⚡ Performance Tips

### ARM64 Native Compilation Benefits
- **Superior Performance**: Native Apple Silicon execution
- **Better Memory Management**: Improved stability and efficiency
- **Enhanced Debugging**: Better crash investigation capabilities
- **Future-Proof**: Optimized for current and future Apple hardware

### Parallel Compilation
```bash
# Use half of available cores to avoid system overload
# For 8-core M1: -j 4, For 10-core M1 Pro: -j 5, For M1 Max: -j 8
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j $(sysctl -n hw.ncpu | awk '{print int($1/2)}')
```

### Build Cleanup
```bash
# Clean previous build if architecture changed
# ARM64:
rm -rf build/macos-arm64
cmake --preset macos-arm64

# Intel x64:
rm -rf build/macos-x64
cmake --preset macos-x64
```

## 📊 macOS Port Status

### ✅ Fully Functional (Phase 22.7)
- **ARM64 Native Compilation**: 100% successful on Apple Silicon
- **Complete Compilation**: All modules compile successfully  
- **Linking**: All libraries link correctly
- **Vector Corruption Protection**: 17+ trillion element detection working perfectly
- **Cross-Platform APIs**: Win32→POSIX compatibility layer stable
- **Advanced INI Processing**: Thousands of successful operations

### � Current Investigation (Phase 22.7)
- **End Token Parsing**: Investigating persistent INI parser exceptions during End token processing
- **Exception Analysis**: "Unknown exception in field parser for: 'End'" and "'  End'" resolution
- **Bypass Optimization**: Enhancing End token bypass mechanisms for complete stability

### 🎯 Recent Achievements
- **Major Breakthrough**: Vector corruption crash completely resolved
- **ARM64 Success**: Native Apple Silicon compilation working
- **Protection System**: Robust validation prevents all corruption scenarios
- **Significant Progress**: Program advances far beyond previous crash points

### 📈 Next Steps
- End token exception resolution
- Complete game engine initialization 
- Full gameplay validation testing

## 📚 Additional Resources

- **Progress Tracking**: [MACOS_PORT_DIARY.md](MACOS_PORT_DIARY.md) - Technical development diary with phase-by-phase progress
- **Next Steps**: [NEXT_STEPS.md](NEXT_STEPS.md)

## 🆘 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### CMake can't find dependencies
```bash
# Update Homebrew and reinstall CMake
brew update && brew upgrade cmake
```

#### Architecture mismatch errors
```bash
# Clean and rebuild with explicit architecture
# ARM64:
rm -rf build/macos-arm64
cmake --preset macos-arm64
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4

# Intel x64:
rm -rf build/macos-x64
cmake --preset macos-x64
cmake --build build/macos-x64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

#### Linking errors
```bash
# Clean and rebuild
rm -rf build/macos-arm64
cmake --preset macos-arm64
cmake --build build/macos-arm64 --target GeneralsXZH -j 4
```

#### Runtime crash or "Unknown exception in field parser"
```bash
# Check if assets are in correct location
ls $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD/Data/
ls $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD/Maps/

# Run with debug output
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && ./GeneralsXZH

# Use LLDB for crash investigation
cd $HOME/GeneralsX/GeneralsMD && lldb -s $REPO_PATH/scripts/debug_script.lldb GeneralsXZH
```

### Performance Issues
```bash
# Verify architecture execution
# ARM64:
file build/macos-arm64/GeneralsMD/GeneralsXZH
# Should show: Mach-O 64-bit executable arm64

# Intel x64:
file build/macos-x64/GeneralsMD/GeneralsXZH
# Should show: Mach-O 64-bit executable x86_64

# Check system resources
top -pid $(pgrep GeneralsXZH)
```

### Support
For macOS port specific issues, check [Issues](https://github.com/fbraz3/GeneralsX/issues) or open a new one.

---
**Last updated**: Dezembro 30, 2024  
**Status**: Phase 22.7 - INI Parser End Token Exception Investigation  
**Architecture**: ARM64 Native (Apple Silicon) + Intel Compatibility
